# **Long Term Insurance**

## **History**

Life Insurance is a **contract** (Policy) in which the **entity providing the insurance** (Insurer) agrees to pay out a **pre-determined lump sum** (Sum Insured) to the **contract owner** (Policyholder) in the event that a **nominated individual** (Insured) dies while the **contract is valid** (In Force).

!!! Info

    In the UK, "assurance" is used to refer to contracts involving lives while "insurance" is used to refer to contract involving property.

The earliest form of life insurance were **annual policies** that provided coverage one year at a time. The insurer charges premiums such that the premium inflow received each year should approximately **match** the expected benefit outgo each year.

This process is known as **Assessmentism** and is essentially a "pay as you go" form of pricing. As the **insured ages**, the probability of death and hence the expected outgo each year increases, **increasing the premiums**.

!!! Info

    Assessmentism is still used today to price **Group Life Insurance**. It is a year to year life insurance policy that an employer purchases for their employees.

    Unlike individual lives whose probability of making a claim inevitably increases each year, the influx of new members into the group helps to offset and stabilize the cost of insurance, keeping it affordable.

### **Level Premium**

One major problem with this is that the annual increases in premium discouraged policyholders from renewing their contracts. This is counter-intuitive, as they would be **priced out of the insurance contract when it is most needed**.

This led to the development of **Level Premium** contracts, where **premiums are fixed over the term of the contract**, which could now be for multiple years at a time.

This led to a win-win situation: People remain insured at older ages and insurers receive more premiums over a longer period.

However, these contracts resulted in a **higher risks for the insurer**, resulting in the need to develop techniques to model **mortality over multiple years** and incorporate the **time value of money** into their calculations, which led to the traditional actuarial techniques we know today.

### **Insurable Interest**

Another problem was that people were purchasing life insurance on **people that they had no connection** to (often public figures), as a form of gambling on when they would die.

In some cases, this also **incentivised people to hasten the death** of the insured person, which would cause the mortality of the person to be higher than what the insurer expects.

Thus, life insurance the concept of **Insurable Interest** to solve these problems. It states that **policyholders should face a financial loss** in the event of the death of the insured. In other words, life insurance **should NOT leave the insured better off** than if the insured had not died.

!!! Note

    This is similar to the concept of Indemnification of short term insurance.

For the purposes of this exam, it is usually assumed that the **policyholder and the insured are the same person**, thus insurable interest is always fulfilled.

## **Traditional Life Insurance**

There are three traditional forms of life insurance that has existed since its inception: Term, Whole Life & Endowment Insurance.

### **Term Insurance**

Term Insurance covers the insured for a **specified term**, which usually ranges from 10 to 30 years. The policy will make a payout **only if the insured dies within this period**. Regular premium payments must be made **throughout the policy term**, otherwise the policy will cease (lapse).

Premiums for term insurance are very **small relative to the sum insured**. This is because the insurer only expects to **make payouts for a small proportion** of the people who bought the policy; the remaining large proportion will expire without having a payout, thus their premiums can be used to **subsidize the benefits for the small proportion**, allowing premiums to remain low for all.

Term Insurance is mainly used at an individual level for **family protection**. Less commonly, companies can also purchase **term insurance for individual employees**. However, they must be able to prove that the **business has insurable interest** in this employee; thus they are usually **key persons that are vital** to running the company.

There are a few special kinds of term insurance:

* **Decreasing Term Insurance**: The death **benefit decreases** over the term of the policy, typically set to match how an **outstanding loan** would decrease over time. This ensures that the **loan will be fully paid** in the event of untimely death of the person paying the loan.
* **Renewable Term Insurance**: The policy can be **renewed** at the end of the initial term, **regardless of the health of the insured**.
* **Convertible Term Insurance**: The policy can be **converted** to a **whole life policy** after the initial term, **regardless of the health of the insured**.

Both Renewable and Convertible typically have some **age limit** for when they can be exercised. Similarly, the new policy will always **charge a higher premium** due to the increased age & risk of the insured.

!!! Info

    There is no general use case for renewable and convertible term insurance; it very much depends on the specific needs of individuals.

### **Whole Life Insurance**

As its name suggests, Whole Life covers the insured for their entire life. Since death is inevitable, the policy will make a payout **whenever the insured dies**. Regular premium payments must be made **up till a certain age** (typically 80 or 90), otherwise the policy will lapse.

!!! Note

    The point of whole life insurance is that it will cover the insured no matter what.
    
    There is a **high chance that the poliycholder will not be able to make payment** in their older ages due to the financial strain or inability to manage their own affairs at an older age.

    Thus, if premiums must be payable throughout the entire term of the policy, then most policyholders would be forced to lapse their policy in their later years, which **defeats the purpose** of the policy in the first place.

Since the policy will inevitably make a payout, there is no subsidizing effect on the premiums, causing **premiums to be much higher than term insurance**.

Instead, the insurer **invests the premium** such that the combined amount of the premiums and investment income is sufficient to cover the benefit of the policy. However, it is **hard to predict investment returns** over an extremely long period of time. Thus, most insurers use a **conservative estimate** (low) for interest, resulting in **relatively higher premiums**.

!!! Info

    The eventual difference between the actual interest rate and the assumed interest rate is known as the **Interest Spread**, which forms the **profit and a buffer for adverse experience**.

Whole Life insurance is mainly used by people who **want to leave a bequest** to their children, especially so for wealthier households as life insurance is **not subject to inheritence tax**.

Another fringe use case is for people who want to **cover the expenses related to their deaths** through a whole life policy with relatively low sum insured.

#### **Cash Values**

Most whole life policies also provides a payout when the policy is lapsed, known as its **Cash Value**.

They typically **start out small** and grow to a substantial amount over time, but is still **much less than the sum insured**. This is intuitive, as if the cash values were larger than the death benefit, the policyholder would get more value from surrendering the policy.

If the policy does NOT offer cash values, then the premiums from policies that were lapsed can be used to subsidize the benefits of those still in force, resulting in **relatively lower premiums**. This is known as **Lapse Supported Insurance**.

#### **Stranger Owned Insurance**

Instead of lapsing the policy, policyholders can instead **sell the policy to a third party**, known as **Stranger Owned Life Insurance**.

Most commonly, the third party is an investment firm who will purchase the policy for an **amount greater than the cash value, but smaller than sum insured**.

The original policyholder remains the insured while the investment firm is now the policyholder. They are now **responsible for making premium payments and will receive the death benefit** when the insured dies.

The hope is that the eventual **death benefit will outweigh the cost of buying the policy and all future premiums**, allowing them to make a profit. If the insured survives longer than expected, the additional premium payments needed decreases the chance of the company making money.

#### **Participating Insurance**

Insurers typically face the following dilemna:

* **Assume Relatively high interest rate**: Premiums are low but chance for profits are low (high investment risk)
* **Assume Relatively low interest rate**: Premiums are high but chance for profits are high (low investment risk)

The solution that the industry came up was to charge the higher premiums, but **share a portion of the profits** with policyholders if the investments do well. However, the reverse is not true - **losses are NOT shared** with policyholders!

This is known as a **Participating Policy** as the policyholder can *participate* in the profits of the insurer. The share of the profits are known as **Dividends**, which can be passed on to the policyholder in two main ways, based on their choice:

* **Cash Benefits** (It is sometimes **automatically** used to offset premiums, known as **Premium Reductions**)
* **Increased Death Benefits**

!!! Info

    The share of the profits are known as **Bonuses** in the UK.

    Similarly, in the UK, the policyholder has no choice on how to receive their bonuses; it will **always be in the form of increased death benefits**.

    There are two kinds of Bonuses - **Reversionary Bonuses** (RB) and **Terminal Bonuses** (TB).

    RBs increase the death benefit by a **specified percentage** each year, which has three variations:

    * **Simple RB**: Applied to the original sum insured only
    * **Compound RB**: Applied to sum insured and accumulated previous RB
    * **Super Compound**: One rate applied to the original sum and another rate applied to the accumulated previous RB

    RBs are typically credited conservatively; thus the **remainder of the bonus** is distributed when the policy is terminated in the form of TBs.

There are several considerations when deciding between the two methods:

<center>

| Cash Benefits | Increasing Death Benefit |
| :-: | :-: |
| Easy for PH to understand | Hard for PH to understand |
| Flexible | Inflexible |
| Taxable | Not taxable |
| Need to liquidate assets; harms long term performance | No need to liquidate; does not harm performance |
| Expensive to liquidate and disburse | Cheap to maintain |

</center>

Another consideration is **fairness**. If increasing death benefit was chosen, only a **small portion of the increased death benefit** will go to the surrender value. However, if cash was chosen, then the policyholder would have received the full dividend amount.

Regardless of the method chosen, the dividend amount is **non-guaranteed**. When dividends **inevitably fluctuate** over the years, policyholders may get upset that the amount was **lesser than what was projected**. Thus, dividends are **smoothed**; the excess from good performing years is saved to cover the shortfall in poor performing years, **limiting the variation** in dividend amounts.

Participating Insurance is most often used as a **passive long term investment vehicle** with the added benefit of insurance cover.

### **Endowment Insurance**

**Endowment Insurance** is a special type of policy that will make a **payout either on the death** of the policyholder **or on survival till a specified term**, known as the **Maturity Date**, whichever is first.

They generally offer cash values and can be participating. Essentially, it is a hybrid of a term insurance and fixed term investment and is **meant to be an investment product**.

However, it **could not compete with the pure investment options** that became popular in the recent decades due to its low returns and flexibility. As such, it has **evolved into the modern life insurance contracts** that will be discussed later on.

### **Other Features**

Joint Life
Policy loan
GCV
Accidental DB

## **Modern Life Insurance**

The design of life insurance has developed in the past few decades resulting in what we know today as **Modern Life Insurance** products.

There are several reasons for this:

* **Increased Competition**: Low rates from traditional products **cannot keep up** with pure investment options
* **Increased Financial Literacy**: People **avoid products that are profitable for insurers** but not very suitable for themselves
* **Changing Demographic**: Jobs have become increasingly short term; thus insurance products need to be **more flexible**

### **Universal Life**

**Universal Life** (UL) contracts are **flexible** whole life contracts with **transparent cash values**.

Premiums paid are deposited into a **notional account** and earn a **credited interest rate** based on investment performance.

!!! Note

    The funds are **not actually seperated** into different account per policyholder; they are still **pooled together into the general account** of the insurer.

    The insurer **keeps track** of how much was deposited and earned by each policyholder and discloses that amount to them.

The **credited rate cannot be 0**, thus the account will never lose value this way. Some products may also offer a **guaranteed minimum rate**, ensuring that the account will always at least grow by a specified amount.

Each period, charges are posted into the account to cover the **cost of insurance** and **policy expenses**. The balance in the account is known as the **Account Value**, which is the cash value that the poliyholder would receive upon lapsing the policy.

!!! Note

    If the policyholder lapses their policy in the first few years of the policy, a **surrender charge** may be applied that reduces the amount received.

    This is to **discourage poliycholders from lapsing their policy too early**, ensuring that the insurer can **recover the high expenses** from setting up the policy.

Another key feature is that it is extremely **flexible**:

* **Death Benefit**: Choose a base amount & whether fixed or increasing
* **Premium**: Free to pay any amount; shortfall is deducted from notional account

The intention is to treat the UL policy as a sort of **savings account** with built in life insurance coverage. It is **expected that they will eventually surrender the policy** for its significant cash value, thus it can be viewed as an updated version of endowment insurance.

!!! Info

    One variation is known as a **Unitized With Profits** (UWP) policy, which is essentially a UL policy with the account value being expressed in terms of **Units**, which are shares in the notional fund, rather than the actual value.

    The investment performance is passed on via an **increase the value of the units**. These policies can also be participating, in which the dividends are passed on in the form of **additional units**.    

### **Equity Linked Insurance**

**Equity Linked Insurance** is the true evolution of endowment insurance as it has the same payment structure (earlier of a fixed term and death).

It has similar features to a UL policy, with some key differences:

* Premiums are invested in an **actual fund**
* **Account value can decrease** if the fund does not perform well
* All benefits are **tied to the account value**

Due to the more volatile nature of this product, the death and maturity benefit are typically **floored at the value of the accumulated premiums** at the time, ensuring that no loss was made from the policy.

!!! Note

    Some policies can also offer a **Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefit** (GMDB) or **Guaranteed Minimum Maturity Benefit** (GMMB) to cover situations where the investments have performed poorly.

    Policyholders are given a choice on these amounts, which allows them to choose if they would like a more **investment or protection oriented policy**.

The main goal of equity linked insurance is to serve as an **investment vehicle** with built in life insurance coverage that can reasonably compete with other pure investment options.

There are several variations of Equity Linked Insurance:

* **Unit Linked Insurance**: Account value is expressed in terms of **Units** of the underlying fund
* **Variable Annuity**: Option to be receive lump sum on maturity or **convert into an annuity**

!!! Warning

    Although both UWP and ULIP use units, the former is from a notional fund while the latter's units are from an actual fund.

    Additionally, despite its name, the **default paymnent for a variable annuity is a lump sum**, not an annuity.

## **Long Term Health Insurance**

### **Disability Income Insurance**

**Disability Income Insurance** makes **regular payments** to individuals who can **no longer work** due to contracting sickness or disability. Premiums are also suspended during this period.

The benefit payable will always be **lesser than their original income** (50 - 70%) in order to encourage the poliycholder to **return to work as soon as possible**. The amount depends on the extent of the disability:

* **Total Disability**: Unable to work at all; higher benefits
* **Partial Disability**: Able to perform some work; lower benefits
* Amount can also be reduced if receiving **other forms of disability income**
* Amount can also be increased to account for **inflation**

!!! Note

    The definition of disability is important - it could be the inability to peform **any job** or the policyholder's **own job**.

    If it is based on **any job**, then they must be unable to peform any job that that they are **reasonably expected to be able to carry out** given their qualifications.

    Since the **bar is significantly higher** for any job, it will make payouts less frequently and hence is cheaper.

The benefit is usually payable for a **fixed term** (2 or 5 years) or up **till retirement**. Once the payment starts, it will continue till the **earlier of the recovery of the policyholder or the end of the term**.

Regardless, payments only start after an initial **Elimination Period** (30 - 365 days) has finished since being afflicted with the disability. This is to allow the policyholder to first seek treatment. If the disability persists after that, then the policy will begin payments.

!!! Note

    For shorter terms, the policy can make **another series of payouts** if the policyholder becomes afflicted with another disability again later on.

    However, if the second disability **occurs too soon** to the first, then they will be considered as the same and will cumulatively only make payouts equal to the benefit term.

    The threshold for what consitutes as being "too soon" is known as the **Off Period**, which defines how long two disabilities must be to be considered seperate.

### **Long Term Care Insurance**

**Long Term Care Insurance** makes regular payments to individuals who **require long term care** (LTC). Premiums are also suspended during this period.

The definition of requiring LTC usually refers to the **inability** to perform two or more **Activities of Daily Living** (ADL):

* Bathing
* Dressing
* Eating
* Toileting
* Continence
* Transferring
* The inability to perform any of the above must be certified by a medical professional

Similar to disability income, the payment term could be fixed or indefinite, subject to an **initial elimintation period** and **off period for subsequent sickness**.

LTC insurance can also be combined with insurance to create interesting payout mechanisms:

* **Return Of Premium**: If the LTC benefits paid out are lesser than the total premiums, then the remainder is **added to the death benefit** of the policy
* **Accelerated Benefit**: The **death benefit is accelerated** and paid under the LTC instead OR the **LTC benefit is accelerated** and paid under the death benefit instead, **whichever happens first**

### **Critical Illness Insurance**

**Critical Illness Insurance** pays a lump sum on diagnosis of a **critical illness** (CI). They can either be whole life or for a fixed term.

Each insurer has a different definition for CI; but most include heart attack, stroke, major organ failure and most forms of cancer.

Unlike the previous two insurance contracts, the **policy expires once a payout is made**; a second critical illness will not be covered.

CI insurance can also be combined with life insurance to offer an **accelerated death benefit**, similar to LTC insurance.

## **Pensions**

### **Defined Benefit Pensions**

**Defined Benefit (DB) Pensions** work similar to annuities that pay a fixed amount each period based on a formula:

$$
    \text{Benefit} = \text{Accrual Rate} \cdot \text{Salary} \cdot \text{Years of employment}
$$

Employers and employees pay into an **internal fund** which earns interest. The fund should, on average, be sufficient to cover the above defined benefits of their employees when they retire.

Some employers may allow employees who leave the company to withdraw their pension at a **deferred amount** to either use as a lump sum or invest in the pension plan of the new employer.

### **Defined Contribution Pensions**

**Defined Contribution (DC) Pensions** work similar to a bank account where the employers and employees pay a pre-determined amount into an **external fund** which earns interest (EG. 401k).

When the employee leaves the company or retires, they fund value is available to them in a lump sum. They have the **flexibility** to live directly off the fund amount or purchase an annuity.
